<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h2>

<p>Inger packed up some food one day in her calfskin bag. “I’d thought of
going across to see my people, just how they’re faring.”</p>

<p>“Ay,” said Isak.</p>

<p>“I must have a bit of talk with them about things.”</p>

<p>Isak did not go out at once to see her off, but waited quite a while.
And when at last he shambled out, looking never the least bit anxious,
never the least bit miserable and full of fear, Inger was all but
vanished already through the fringe of the forest.</p>

<p>“Hem!” He cleared his throat, and called, “Will you be coming back
maybe?” He had not meant to ask her that, but.⁠ ⁠…</p>

<p>“Coming back? Why, what’s in your mind? Of course I’ll be coming
back.”</p>

<p>“H’m.”</p>

<p>So he was left alone again⁠—eyah, well⁠ ⁠… ! With his strength, and the
love of work that was in him, he could not idle in and out about the
hut doing nothing; he set to, clearing timber, felling straight, good
sticks, and cutting them flat on two sides. He worked at this all
through the day, then he milked the goats and went to bed.</p>

<p>Sadly bare and empty now in the hut; a heavy silence clung about
the peat walls and the earthen floor; a deep and solemn loneliness.
Spinning-wheel and carding-combs were in their place; the beads, too,
were safe as they had been, stowed away in a bag under the roof. Inger
had taken nothing of her belongings. But Isak, unthinkably simple as
he was, grew afraid of the dark in the light summer nights, and saw
Shapes and Things stealing past the window. He got up before dawn,
about two o’clock by the light, and ate his breakfast, a mighty dish
of porridge to last the day, and save the waste of time in cooking
more. In the evening he turned up new ground, to make a bigger field
for the potatoes.</p>

<p>Three days he worked with spade and ax by turns; Inger should be
coming on the next. ’Twould be but reasonable to have a platter of
fish for her when she came⁠—but the straight road to the water lay by
the way she would come, and it might seem.⁠ ⁠… So he went a longer way;
a new way, over the hills where he had never been before. Grey rock
and brown, and strewed about with bits of heavy stone, heavy as copper
or lead. There might be many things in those heavy stones; gold or
silver, like as not⁠—he had no knowledge of such things, and did not
care. He came to the water; the fly was up, and the fish were biting
well that night. He brought home a basket of fish that Inger would
open her eyes to see! Going back in the morning by the way he had
come, he picked up a couple of the heavy little stones among the
hills; they were brown, with specks of dark blue here and there, and
wondrous heavy in the hand.</p>

<p>Inger had not come, and did not come. This was the fourth day. He
milked the goats as he had used to do when he lived alone with them
and had no other to help; then he went up to a quarry near by and
carried down stones; great piles of carefully chosen blocks and
flakes, to build a wall. He was busy with no end of things.</p>

<p>On the fifth evening, he turned in to rest with a little fear at his
heart⁠—but there were the carding-combs and spinning-wheel, and the
string of beads. Sadly empty and bare in the hut, and never a sound;
the hours were long, and when at last he did hear something like a
sound of footsteps outside, he told himself that it was fancy, nothing
more. “Eyah, <i>Herregud</i>!”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> he murmured, desolate in spirit. And Isak was not one to use
words lightly. There was the tramping of feet again outside, and a
moment after something gliding past the window; something with horns,
something alive. He sprang up, over to the door, and lo, a vision!
“God or the devil,” muttered Isak, who did not use words lightly. He
saw a cow; Inger and a cow, vanishing into the shed.</p>

<p>If he had not stood there himself and heard it⁠—Inger talking softly
to the cow in the shed⁠—he would not have believed. But there he
stood. And all at once a black misgiving came into his mind: a clever
wife, ay, a manager of wonders⁠—but, after all.⁠ ⁠… No, it was too
much, and that was the only word for it. A spinning-wheel and
carding-combs at a pinch; even the beads perhaps, though they were
over fine to be come by in any way proper and natural. But a cow,
picked up straying on the road, maybe, or in a field⁠—it would be
missed in no time, and have to be found.</p>

<p>Inger stepped out of the shed, and said with a proud little laugh:</p>

<p>“It’s only me. I’ve brought my cow along.”</p>

<p>“H’m,” said Isak.</p>

<p>“It was that made me so long⁠—I couldn’t go but softly with her over
the hills.”</p>

<p>“And so you’ve brought a cow?” said he.</p>

<p>“Yes,” said she, all ready to burst with greatness and riches on
earth. “Don’t you believe me, perhaps?”</p>

<p>Isak feared the worst, but made no sign, and only said:</p>

<p>“Come inside and get something to eat.”</p>

<p>“Did you see her? Isn’t she a pretty cow?”</p>

<p>“Ay, a fine cow,” said Isak. And speaking as carelessly as he could,
he asked, “Where d’you get her?”</p>

<p>“Her name’s Goldenhorns. What’s that wall to be for you’ve been
building up here? You’ll work yourself to death, you will. Oh, come
and look at the cow, now, won’t you?”</p>

<p>They went out to look, and Isak was in his underclothes, but that was
no matter. They looked and looked the cow all over carefully, in every
part, and noted all the markings, head and shoulders, buttocks and
thighs, where it was red and white, and how it stood.</p>

<p>“How old d’you think she might be?” asked Isak cautiously.</p>

<p>“Think? Why, she’s just exactly a tiny way on in her fourth year. I
brought her up myself, and they all said it was the sweetest calf
they’d ever seen. But will there be feed enough here d’you think?”</p>

<p>Isak began to believe, as he was only too willing to do, that all was
well. “As for the feed, why, there’ll be feed enough, never fear.”</p>

<p>Then they went indoors to eat and drink and make an evening together.<br/>

They lay awake talking of Cow; of the great event. “And isn’t she a<br/>

dear cow, too? Her second’s on the way. And her name’s Goldenhorns.<br/>

Are you asleep, Isak?”<br/>
</p>

<p>“No.”</p>

<p>“And what do you think, she knew me again; knew me at once, and
followed me like a lamb. We lay up in the hills a bit last night.”</p>

<p>“Ho?”</p>

<p>“But she’ll have to be tied up through the summer, all the same, or
she’ll be running off. A cow’s a cow.”</p>

<p>“Where’s she been before?” asked Isak at last.</p>

<p>“Why, with my people, where she belonged. And they were quite sorry to
lose her, I can tell you; and the little ones cried when I took her
away.”</p>

<p>Could she be making it all up, and coming out with it so pat? No, it
wasn’t thinkable. It must be true, the cow was hers. Ho, they were
getting well-to-do, with this hut of theirs, this farm of theirs; why,
’twas good enough for any one. Ay, they’d as good as all they could
wish for already. Oh, that Inger; he loved her and she loved him
again; they were frugal folk; they lived in primitive wise, and lacked
for nothing. “Let’s go to sleep!” And they went to sleep. And wakened
in the morning to another day, with things to look at, matters to see
to, once again; ay, toil and pleasure, ups and downs, the way of life.</p>

<p>As, for instance, with those timber baulks⁠—should he try to fit them
up together? Isak had kept his eyes about him down in the village,
with that very thing in mind, and seen how it was done; he could build
with timber himself, why not? Moreover, it was a call upon him;
it must be done. Hadn’t they a farm with sheep, a farm with a cow
already, goats that were many already and would be more?⁠—their live
stock alone was crowding them out of the turf hut; something must be
done. And best get on with it at once, while the potatoes were still
in flower, and before the haytime began. Inger would have to lend a
hand here and there.</p>

<p>Isak wakes in the night and gets up, Inger sleeping fine and sound
after her long tramp, and out he goes to the cowshed. Now it must not
be thought that he talked to Cow in any obsequious and disgustful
flattery; no, he patted her decently, and looked her over once more in
every part, to see if there should, by chance, be any sign, any mark
of her belonging to strange owners. No mark, no sign, and Isak steals
away relieved.</p>

<p>There lies the timber. He falls to, rolling the baulks, then lifting
them, setting them up against the wall in a framework; one big frame
for a parlour, and a smaller one⁠—there must be a room to sleep in. It
was heavy work, hard-breathing work, and his mind being set on it, he
forgot the time. There comes a smoke from the roof-hole of the hut,
and Inger steps out and calls to breakfast.</p>

<p>“And what are you busy with now?” asked Inger.</p>

<p>“You’re early about,” says Isak, and that was all.</p>

<p>Ho, that Isak with his secrets and his lordly ways! But it pleased
him, maybe, to have her asking and wondering, and curious about his
doings. He ate a bit, and sat for a while in the hut before going out
again. What could he be waiting for?</p>

<p>“H’m,” says he at last, getting up. “This won’t do. Can’t sit here
idling today. Work to be done.”</p>

<p>“Seems like you’re building,” says Inger. “What?”</p>

<p>And he answered condescendingly, this great man who went about
building with timber all by himself, he answered: “Why, you can see as
much, I take it.”</p>

<p>“Yes.⁠ ⁠… Yes, of course.”</p>

<p>“Building⁠—why, there’s no help for it as I can see.. Here’s you come
bringing a whole cow to the farm⁠—that means a cowshed, I suppose?”</p>

<p>Poor Inger, not so eternally wise as he, as Isak, that lord of
creation. And this was before she learned to know him, and reckon with
his way of putting things. Says Inger:</p>

<p>“Why, it’s never a cowshed you’re building, surely?”</p>

<p>“Ho,” says he.</p>

<p>“But you don’t mean it? I⁠—I thought you’d be building a house first.”</p>

<p>“Think so?” says Isak, putting up a face as if he’d never in life have
thought of that himself.</p>

<p>“Why yes. And put the beasts in the hut.”</p>

<p>Isak thought for a bit. “Ay, maybe ’twould be best so.”</p>

<p>“There,” says Inger, all glad and triumphant. “You see I’m some good
after all.”</p>

<p>“Ay, that’s true. And what’d you say to a house with two rooms in?”</p>

<p>“<i>Two</i> rooms? Oh⁠ ⁠… ! Why, ’twould be just like other folks. Do you
think we could?”</p>

<p>They did. Isak he went about building, notching his baulks and fitting
up his framework; also he managed a hearth and fireplace of picked
stones, though this last was troublesome, and Isak himself was not
always pleased with his work. Haytime came, and he was forced to
climb down from his building and go about the hillsides far and near,
cutting grass and bearing home the hay in mighty loads. Then one rainy
day he must go down to the village.</p>

<p>“What you want in the village?”</p>

<p>“Well, I can’t say exactly as yet.⁠ ⁠…”</p>

<p>He set off, and stayed away two days, and came Back with a
cooking-stove⁠—a barge of a man surging up through the forest with
a whole iron stove on his back. “ ’Tis more than a man can do,” said
Inger. “You’ll kill yourself that gait.” But Isak pulled down the
stone hearth, that didn’t look so well in the new house, and set
up the cooking-stove in its place. “ ’Tisn’t every one has a
cooking-stove,” said Inger. “Of all the wonders, how we’re getting
on!⁠ ⁠…”</p>

<p>Haymaking still; Isak bringing in loads and masses of hay, for
woodland grass is not the same as meadow grass, more’s the pity, but
poorer by far. It was only on rainy days now that he could spare time
for his building; ’twas a lengthy business, and even by August, when
all the hay was in, safely stored under the shelter of the rock, the
new house was still but half-way done. Then by September: “This won’t
do,” said Isak. “You’d better run down to the village and get a man to
help.” Inger had been something poorly of late, and didn’t run much
now, but all the same she got herself ready to go.</p>

<p>But Isak had changed his mind again; had put on his lordly manner
again, and said he would manage by himself. “No call to bother with
other folk,” says he; “I can manage it alone.”</p>

<p>“ ’Tis more than one man’s work,” says Inger. “You’ll wear yourself
out.”</p>

<p>“Just help me to hoist these up,” says Isak, and that was all.</p>

<p>October came, and Inger had to give up. This was a hard blow, for the
roof-beams must be got up at any cost, and the place covered in before
the autumn rains; there was not a day to be lost. What could be wrong
with Inger? Not going to be ill? She would make cheese now and then
from the goats’ milk, but beyond that she did little save shifting
Goldenhorns a dozen times a day where she grazed.</p>

<p>“Bring up a good-sized basket, or a box,” she had said, “next time
you’re down to the village.”</p>

<p>“What d’you want that for?” asked Isak.</p>

<p>“I’ll just be wanting it,” said Inger.</p>

<p>Isak hauled up the roof-beams on a rope, Inger guiding them with one
hand; it seemed a help just to have her about. Bit by bit the work
went on; there was no great height to the roof, but the timber was
huge and heavy for a little house.</p>

<p>The weather kept fine, more or less. Inger got the potatoes in by
herself, and Isak had the roofing done before the rain came on in
earnest. The goats were brought in of a night into the hut and all
slept there together; they managed somehow, they managed everyway, and
did not grumble.</p>

<p>Isak was getting ready for another journey down to the village. Said<br/>

Inger very humbly:<br/>
</p>

<p>“Do you think perhaps you could bring up a good-sized basket, or a
box?”</p>

<p>“I’ve ordered some glass windows,” said Isak. “and a couple of painted
doors. I’ll have to fetch them up,” said he in his lordly way.</p>

<p>“Ay well, then. It’s no great matter about the basket.”</p>

<p>“What did you want with a basket? What’s it for?”</p>

<p>“What’s it for?⁠ ⁠… Oh, haven’t you eyes in your head!”</p>

<p>Isak went off deep in thought. Two days later he came back, with a
window and a door for the parlour, and a door for the bedroom; also he
had hung round his neck in front a good-sized packing-case, and full
of provisions to boot.</p>

<p>“You’ll carry yourself to death one day,” said Inger.</p>

<p>“Ho, indeed!” Isak was very far indeed from being dead; he took out
a bottle of medicine from his pocket⁠—naphtha it was⁠—and gave it to
Inger with orders to take it regularly and get well again. And there
were the windows and the painted doors that he could fairly boast of;
he set to work at once fitting them in. Oh, such little doors, and
secondhand at that, but painted up all neat and fine again in red and
white; ’twas almost as good as having pictures on the walls.</p>

<p>And now they moved into the new building, and the animals had the turf
hut to themselves, only a lambing ewe was left with Cow, lest she
should feel lonely.</p>

<p>They had done well, these builders in the waste: ay, ’twas a wonder
and a marvel to themselves.</p>

		</section>
	</body>
</html>
