<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1-14" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</h2>

<p>And time went on.</p>

<p>Yes, Eleseus was sent to town after all; Inger managed that. He was
there for a year, then he was confirmed, and after that had a regular
place in the engineer’s office, and grew more and more clever at
writing and things. To see the letters he sent home⁠—sometimes with
red and black ink, like pictures almost. And the talk of them, the
words he used. Now and again he asked for money, something towards his
expenses. A watch and chain, for instance, he must have, so as not to
oversleep himself in the morning and be late at the office; money for
a pipe and tobacco also, such as the other young clerks in the town
always had. And for something he called pocket-money, and something he
called evening classes, where he learned drawing and gymnastics and
other matters proper to his rank and position. Altogether, it was no
light matter to keep Eleseus going in a berth in town.</p>

<p>“Pocket-money?” said Isak. “Is that money to keep in your pocket,
maybe?”</p>

<p>“That must be it, no doubt,” said Inger. “So as not to be altogether
without. And it’s not much; only a <i>Daler</i> now and then.”</p>

<p>“Ay, that’s just it,” said Isak harshly. “A <i>Daler</i> now and a <i>Daler</i>
then.⁠ ⁠…” But his harshness was all because he missed Eleseus himself,
and wanted him home. “It makes too many <i>Dalers</i> in the long run,”
said he. “I can’t keep, on like this; you must write and tell him he
can have no more.”</p>

<p>“Ho, very well then!” said Inger in an offended tone.</p>

<p>“There’s Sivert⁠—what does he get by way of pocket-money?”</p>

<p>Inger answered: “You’ve never been in a town, and so you don’t know
these things. Sivert’s no need of pocket-money. And talking of money,
Sivert ought to be none so badly off when his Uncle Sivert dies.”</p>

<p>“You don’t know.”</p>

<p>“Ay, but I do know.”</p>

<p>And this was right enough in a way; Uncle Sivert had said something
about making little Sivert his heir. Uncle Sivert had heard of Eleseus
and his grand doings in town, and the story did not please him; he
nodded and bit his lips, and muttered that a nephew called up as his
namesake⁠—named after Uncle Sivert⁠—should not come to want. But what
was this fortune Uncle Sivert was supposed to possess? Had he really,
besides his neglected farm and his fishery, the heap of money and
means folk generally thought? No one could say for certain. And apart
from that, Uncle Sivert himself was an obstinate man; he insisted that
little Sivert should come to stay with him. It was a point of honour
with him, this last; he should take little Sivert and look after him,
as the engineer had done with Eleseus.</p>

<p>But how could it be done? Send little Sivert away from home?⁠—it was
out of the question. He was all the help left to Isak now. Moreover,
the lad himself had no great wish to go and stay with his famous
uncle; he had tried it once, but had come home again. He was
confirmed, shot up in stature, and grew; the down showed on his cheek,
his hands were big, a pair of willing slaves. And he worked like a
man.</p>

<p>Isak could hardly have managed to get the new barn built at all
without Sivert’s help⁠—but there it stood now, with bridge-way and
air-holes and all, as big as they had at the parsonage itself. True,
it was only a half-timbered building covered with boarding, but extra
stout built, with iron clinches at the corners, and covered with
one-inch plank from Isak’s own sawmill. And Sivert had hammered in
more than one nail at the work, and lifted the heavy beams for the
framework till he was near fainting. Sivert got on well with his
father, and worked steadily at his side; he was made of the same
stuff. And yet he was not above such simple ways as going up the
hillside for tansy to rub with so as to smell nice in church. ’Twas
Leopoldine was the one for getting fancies in her head, which was
natural enough, she being a girl, and the only daughter. That summer,
if you please, she had discovered that she could not eat her porridge
at supper without treacle⁠—simply couldn’t. And she was no great use
at any kind of work either.</p>

<p>Inger had not yet given up her idea of keeping a servant; she
brought up the question every spring, and every time Isak opposed it
stubbornly. All the cutting out and sewing and fine weaving she could
do, not to speak of making embroidered slippers, if she had but the
time to herself! And of late, Isak had been something less firm in his
refusal, though he grumbled still. Ho, the first time! He had made a
whole long speech about it; not as a matter of right and reason, nor
yet from pride, but, alas! from weakness, from anger at the idea. But
now, he seemed to be giving way, as if ashamed.</p>

<p>“If ever I’m to have help in the house, now’s the time,” said Inger.
“A few years more, and Leopoldine’ll be big enough to do this and
that.”</p>

<p>“Help?” said Isak. “What do you want help with, anyway?”</p>

<p>“Want with it, indeed? Haven’t you help yourself? Haven’t you Sivert
all the time?”</p>

<p>What could Isak say to a meaningless argument like that? He answered:
“Ay, well; when you get a girl up here, I doubt you’ll be able to
plough and sow and reap and manage all by yourselves. And then Sivert
and I can go our ways.”</p>

<p>“That’s as may be,” said Inger. “But I’ll just say this: that I could
get Barbro to come now; she’s written home about it.”</p>

<p>“What Barbro?” said Isak. “Is it that Brede’s girl you mean?”</p>

<p>“Yes. She’s in Bergen now.”</p>

<p>“I’ll not have that Brede’s girl Barbro up here,” said he. “Whoever
you get, I’ll have none of her.”</p>

<p>That was better than nothing; Isak refused to have Barbro; he no
longer said they would have no servant at all.</p>

<p>Barbro from Breidablik was not the sort of girl Isak approved of;
she was shallow and unsettled like her father⁠—maybe like her mother
too⁠—a careless creature, no steady character at all. She had not
stayed long at the Lensmand’s; only a year. After her confirmation,
she went to help at the storekeeper’s, and was there another year.
Here she turned pious and got religion, and when the Salvation Army
came to the village she joined it, and went about with a red band on
her sleeve and carried a guitar. She went to Bergen in that costume,
on the storekeeper’s boat⁠—that was last year. And she had just sent
home a photograph of herself to her people at Breidablik. Isak had
seen it; a strange young lady with her hair curled up and a long
watch-chain hanging down over her breast. Her parents were proud of
little Barbro, and showed the photograph about to all who came; ’twas
grand to see how she had learned town ways and got on in the world. As
for the red band and the guitar, she had given them up, it seemed.</p>

<p>“I took the picture along and showed it to the Lensmand’s lady,” said<br/>

Brede. “She didn’t know her again.”<br/>
</p>

<p>“Is she going to stay in Bergen?” said Isak suspiciously.</p>

<p>“Why, unless she goes on to Christiania, perhaps,” said Brede. “What’s
there for her to do here? She’s got a new place now, as housekeeper,
for two young clerks. They’ve no wives nor womenfolk of their own, and
they pay her well.”</p>

<p>“How much?” said Isak.</p>

<p>“She doesn’t say exactly in the letter. But it must be something
altogether different from what folk pay down here, that’s plain. Why,
she gets Christmas presents, and presents other times as well, and not
counted off her wages at all.”</p>

<p>“Ho!” said Isak.</p>

<p>“You wouldn’t like to have her up at your place?” asked Brede.</p>

<p>“I?” said Isak, all taken aback.</p>

<p>“No, of course, he he! It was only a way of speaking. Barbro’s well
enough where she is. What was I going to say? You didn’t notice
anything wrong with the line coming down⁠—the telegraph, what?”</p>

<p>“With the telegraph? No.”</p>

<p>“No, no⁠ ⁠… There’s not much wrong with it now since I took over.
And then I’ve my own machine here on the wall to give a warning if
anything happens. I’ll have to take a walk up along the line one of
these days and see how things are. I’ve too much to manage and look
after, ’tis more than one man’s work. But as long as I’m Inspector
here, and hold an official position, of course I can’t neglect my
duties. If I hadn’t the telegraph, of course⁠ ⁠… and it may not be for
long.⁠ ⁠…”</p>

<p>“Why?” said Isak. “You thinking of giving it up, maybe?”</p>

<p>“Well, I can’t say exactly,” said Brede. “I haven’t quite decided.<br/>

They want me to move down into the village again.”<br/>
</p>

<p>“Who is it wants you?” asked Isak.</p>

<p>“Oh, all of them. The Lensmand wants me to go and be assistant there
again, and the doctor wants me to drive for him, and the parson’s wife
said more than once she misses me to lend a hand, if it wasn’t such a
long way to go. How was it with that strip of hill, Isak⁠—the bit you
sold? Did you get as much for it as they say?”</p>

<p>“Ay, ’tis no lie,” answered Isak.</p>

<p>“But what did Geissler want with it, anyway? It lies there
still⁠—curious thing! Year after year and nothing done.”</p>

<p>It was a curious thing; Isak had often wondered about it himself; he
had spoken to the Lensmand about it, and asked for Geissler’s address,
thinking to write to him⁠ ⁠… Ay, it was a mystery.</p>

<p>“ ’Tis more than I can say,” said Isak.</p>

<p>Brede made no secret of his interest in this matter of the sale. “They
say there’s more of the same sort up there,” he said, “besides yours.
Maybe there’s more in it than we know. ’Tis a pity that we should sit
here like dumb beasts and know nothing of it all. I’ve thought of
going up one day myself to have a look.”</p>

<p>“But do you know anything about metals and such-like?” asked Isak.</p>

<p>“Why, I know a bit. And I’ve asked one or two others. Anyhow, I’ll
have to find something; I can’t live and keep us all here on this bit
of a farm. It’s sheer impossible. ’Twas another matter with you that’s
got all that timber and good soil below. ’Tis naught but moorland
here.”</p>

<p>“Moorland’s good soil enough,” said Isak shortly. “I’ve the same
myself.”</p>

<p>“But there’s no draining it,” said Brede.⁠ ⁠… “It can’t be done.”</p>

<p>But it could be done. Coming down the road that day Isak noticed other
clearings; two of them were lower down, nearer the village, but there
was one far up above, between Breidablik and Sellanraa⁠—ay, men were
beginning to work on the land now; in the old days when Isak first
came up, it had lain waste all of it. And these three new settlers
were folks from another district; men with some sense in their heads,
by the look of things. They didn’t begin by borrowing money to build
a house; no, they came up one year and did their spade work and went
away again; vanished as if they were dead. That was the proper way;
ditching first, then plough and sow. Axel Ström was nearest to Isak’s
land now, his next-door neighbour. A clever fellow, unmarried, he came
from Helgeland. He had borrowed Isak’s new harrow to break up his
soil, and not till the second year had he set up a hayshed and a turf
hut for himself and a couple of animals. He had called his place
Maaneland, because it looked nice in the moonlight. He had no
womenfolk himself, and found it difficult to get help in the summer,
lying so far out, but he managed things the right way, no doubt about
that. Not as Brede Olsen did, building a house first, and then coming
up with a big family and little ones and all, with neither soil nor
stock to feed them. What did Brede Olsen know of draining moorland and
breaking new soil?</p>

<p>He knew how to waste his time idling, did Brede. He came by Sellanraa
one day, going up to the hills⁠—simply to look for precious metals. He
came back the same evening; had not found anything definite, he said,
but certain signs⁠—and he nodded. He would come up again soon, and go
over the hills thoroughly, over towards Sweden.</p>

<p>And sure enough, Brede came up again. He had taken a fancy to the
work, no doubt; but he called it telegraph business this time⁠—must
go up and look over the whole of the line. Meanwhile his wife and
children at home looked after the farm, or left it to look after
itself. Isak was sick and tired of Brede’s visits, and went out of the
room when he came; then Inger and Brede would sit talking heartily
together. What could they have to talk about? Brede often went down to
the village, and had always some news to tell of the great folk there;
Inger, on the other hand, could always draw upon her famous journey to
Trondhjem and her stay there. She had grown talkative in the years she
had been away, and was always ready to gossip with any one. No, she
was no longer the same straightforward, simple Inger of the old days.</p>

<p>Girls and women came up continually to Sellanraa to have a piece of
work cut out, or a long hem put through the machine in a moment, and
Inger entertained them well. Oline too came again, couldn’t help it,
belike; came both spring and autumn; fair-spoken, soft as butter, and
thoroughly false. “Just looked along to see how things are with you,”
she said each time. “And I’ve been longing so for a sight of the lads,
I’m that fond of them, the little angels they were. Ay, they’re big
fellows now, but it’s strange⁠ ⁠… I can’t forget the time when they
were small and I had them in my care. And here’s you building and
building again, and making a whole town of the place. Going to have
a bell to ring, maybe, at the roof of the barn, same as at the
parsonage?”</p>

<p>Once Oline came and brought another woman with her, and the pair of
them and Inger had a nice day together. The more Inger had sitting
round her, the better she worked at her sewing and cutting out, making
a show of it, waving her scissors and swinging the iron. It reminded
her of the place where she had learned it all⁠—there was always many
of them in the workrooms there. Inger made no secret of where she had
got her knowledge and all her art from; it was from Trondhjem. It
almost appeared as if she had not been in prison at all, in the
ordinary way, but at school, in an institute, where one could learn to
sew and weave and write, and do dressing and dyeing⁠—all that she had
learned in Trondhjem. She spoke of the place as of a home; there were
so many people she knew there, superintendents and forewomen and
attendants, it had been dull and empty to come back here again, and
hard to find herself altogether cut off from the life and society
she had been accustomed to. She even made some show of having a
cold⁠—couldn’t stand the keen air there; for years after her return
she had been too poorly to work out of doors in all seasons. It was
for the outside work she really ought to have a servant.</p>

<p>“Ay, Heaven save us,” said Oline, “and why shouldn’t you have a
servant indeed, when you’ve means and learning and a great fine house
and all!”</p>

<p>It was pleasant to meet with sympathy, and Inger did not deny it. She
worked away at her machine till the place shook, and the ring on her
finger shone.</p>

<p>“There, you can see for yourself,” said Oline to the woman with her.<br/>

“It’s true what I said, Inger she wears a gold ring on her finger.”<br/>
</p>

<p>“Would you like to see it?” asked Inger, taking it off.</p>

<p>Oline seemed still to have her doubts; she turned it in her fingers
as a monkey with a nut, looked at the mark. “Ay, ’tis as I say; Inger
with all her means and riches.”</p>

<p>The other woman took the ring with veneration, and smiled humbly. “You
can put it on for a bit if you like,” said Inger. “Don’t be afraid, it
won’t break.”</p>

<p>And Inger was amiable and kind. She told them about the cathedral at
Trondhjem, and began like this: “You haven’t seen the cathedral at
Trondhjem, maybe? No, you haven’t been there!” And it might have been
her own cathedral, from the way she praised it, boasted of it, told
them height and breadth; it was a marvel! Seven priests could stand
there preaching all at once and never hear one another. “And then I
suppose you’ve never seen St. Olaf’s Well? Right in the middle of the
cathedral itself, it is, on one side, and it’s a bottomless well. When
we went there, we took each a little stone with us, and dropped it in,
but it never reached the bottom.”</p>

<p>“Never reached the bottom?” whispered the two women, shaking their
heads.</p>

<p>“And there’s a thousand other things besides in that cathedral,”
exclaimed Inger delightedly. “There’s the silver chest to begin with.
It’s Holy St. Olaf his own silver chest that he had. But the Marble
Church⁠—that was a little church all of pure marble⁠—the Danes took
that from us in the war.⁠ ⁠…”</p>

<p>It was time for the women to go. Oline took Inger aside, led her out
into the larder where she knew all the cheeses were stored, and closed
the door. “What is it?” asked Inger.</p>

<p>Oline whispered: “Os-Anders, he doesn’t dare come here any more. I’ve
told him.”</p>

<p>“Ho!” said Inger.</p>

<p>“I told him if he only dared, after what he’d done to you.”</p>

<p>“Ay,” said Inger. “But he’s been here many a time since for all that.<br/>

And he can come if he likes, I’m not afraid.”<br/>
</p>

<p>“No, that’s so,” said Oline. “But I know what I know, and if you like,<br/>

I’ll lay a charge against him.”<br/>
</p>

<p>“Ho!” said Inger. “No, you’ve no call to do that. Tis not worth it.”</p>

<p>But she was not ill pleased to have Oline on her side; it cost her a
cheese, to be sure, but Oline thanked her so fulsomely: “ ’Tis as I
say, ’tis as I’ve always said: Inger, she gives with both hands;
nothing grudging, nothing sparing about her! No, maybe you’re not
afraid of Os-Anders, but I’ve forbid him to come here all the same.
’Twas the least I could do for you.”</p>

<p>Said Inger then: “What harm could it do if he did come, anyway? He
can’t hurt me any more.”</p>

<p>Oline pricked up her ears: “Ho, you’ve learned a way yourself, maybe?”</p>

<p>“I shan’t have any more children,” said Inger.</p>

<p>And now they were quits, each holding as good a trump as the other:
for Oline stood there knowing all the time that Os-Anders the Lapp had
died the day before.⁠ ⁠…</p>

<hr/>

<p>Why should Inger say that about having no more children? She was not
on bad terms with her husband, ’twas no cat-and-dog life between
them⁠—far from it. They had each their own little ways, but it was
rarely they quarrelled, and never for long at a time; it was soon made
up. And many a time Inger would suddenly be just as she had been in
the old days, working hard in the cowshed or in the field; as if she
had had a relapse into health again. And at such times Isak would look
at his wife with grateful eyes; if he had been the sort of man to
speak his mind at once, he might have said, “H’m. What does this mean,
heh?” or something of the sort, just to show he appreciated it. But
he waited too long, and his praise came too late. So Inger, no doubt,
found it not worth while, and did not care to keep it up.</p>

<p>She might have had children till past fifty; as it was, she was
perhaps hardly forty now. She had learned all sorts of things at the
institution⁠—had she also learned to play tricks with herself? She
had come back so thoroughly trained and educated after her long
association with the other murderesses; maybe the men had taught her
something too⁠—the gaolers, the doctors. She told Isak one day what
one young medical man had said of her little crime: “Why should it be
a criminal offence to kill children⁠—ay, even healthy children? They
were nothing but lumps of flesh after all.”</p>

<p>Isak asked: “Wasn’t he terribly cruel himself, then?”</p>

<p>“Him!” exclaimed Inger, and told how kind he had been to her herself;
it was he who had got another doctor to operate on her mouth and make
a human being of her. Now there was only a scar to be seen.</p>

<p>Only a scar, yes. And a fine woman she was in her way, tall and not
over-stout, dark, with rich hair; in summer she went barefooted
mostly, and with her skirt kilted high; Inger was not afraid of
letting her calves be seen. Isak saw them⁠—as who did not!</p>

<p>They did not quarrel, no. Isak had no talent for quarrelling, and his
wife had grown readier-witted to answer back. A thorough good quarrel
took a long time to grow with Isak, heavy stub of a man as he was;
he found himself all entangled in her words, and could say next to
nothing himself; and besides, he was fond of her⁠—powerfully in love
was Isak. And it was not often he had any need to answer. Inger did
not complain; he was an excellent husband in many ways, and she let
him alone. What had she to complain of at all? Isak was not a man to
be despised; she might have married a worse. Worn out, was he? True,
he showed signs of being tired now at times, but nothing serious. He
was full of old health and unwasted strength, like herself, and in
this autumn of their married life he fulfilled his part at least as
affectionately as she did.</p>

<p>But nothing particularly beautiful nor grand about him? No. And here
came her superiority. Inger might well think to herself at times how
she had seen finer men; handsome gentlemen with walking-sticks and
handkerchiefs and starched collars to wear⁠—oh, those gentlemen of the
town! And so she kept Isak in his place, treated him, as it were, no
better than he deserved. He was only a peasant, a clodhopper of the
wilds; if her mouth had been as it was now from the start she would
never have taken him; be sure of that. No, she could have done better
than that! The home he had given her, the life he offered her, were
poor enough; she might at least have married some one from her own
village, and lived among neighbours, with a circle of friends, instead
of here like an outcast in the wilds. It was not the place for her
now; she had learned to look differently at life.</p>

<p>Strange, how one could come to look differently at things! Inger found
no pleasure now in admiring a new calf; she did not clap her hands in
surprise when Isak came down from the hills with a big basket of fish;
no, she had lived for six years among greater things. And of late she
had even ceased to be heavenly and sweet when she called him in to
dinner. “Your food’s ready, aren’t you coming in?” was all she said
now. And it didn’t sound nice. Isak wondered a little at first; it was
a curious way to speak; a nasty, uncaring, take-it-or-leave-it way to
speak. And he answered: “Why, I didn’t know ’twas ready.” But when
Inger pointed out that he ought to have known, or might have guessed
it, anyway, by the sun, he said no more, and let the matter drop.</p>

<p>Ah, but once he got a hold on her and used it⁠—that was when she tried
to steal his money from him. Not that Isak was a miser in that way,
but the money was clearly his. Ho, it was nearly being ruin and
disaster for her that time! But even then it was not exactly
thoroughgoing, out-and-out wickedness on Inger’s part; she wanted the
money for Eleseus⁠—for her blessed boy Eleseus in town, who was asking
for his <i>Daler</i> again. Was he to go there among all the fine folk and
with empty pockets? After all, she had a mother’s heart. She asked his
father for the money first, and, finding it was no good, had taken it
herself. Whether Isak had had some suspicion beforehand, or had found
it out by accident⁠—anyhow, it was found out. And suddenly Inger found
herself gripped by both arms, felt herself lifted from the floor,
and thumped down on to the floor again. It was something strange and
terrible⁠—a sort of avalanche. Isak’s hands were not weak, not worn
out now. Inger gave a groan, her head fell back, she shivered, and
gave up the money.</p>

<p>Even then Isak said little, though Inger made no attempt to hinder him
from speaking. What he did say was uttered, as it were, in one hard
breath: “Huttch! You⁠—you’re not fit to have in the place!”</p>

<p>She hardly knew him again. Oh, but it must have been long-stored
bitterness that would not be repressed.</p>

<p>A miserable day, and a long night, and a day beyond. Isak went out of
the house and lay outside, for all that there was hay to be got in;
Sivert was with his father. Inger had little Leopoldine and the
animals to keep her company; but lonely she was for all that, crying
nearly all the time and shaking her head at herself. Only once in all
her life before had she felt so moved, and this day called it to mind;
it was when she had lain in her bed and throttled a newborn child.</p>

<p>Where were Isak and his son? They had not been idle; no, they had
stolen a day and a night or thereabouts from the haymaking, and had
built a boat up on the lake. Oh, a rough and poor-looking vessel
enough, but strong and sound as their work had always been; they had a
boat now, and could go fishing with nets.</p>

<p>When they came home the hay was dry as ever. They had cheated
providence by trusting it, and suffered no loss; they had gained by
it. And then Sivert flung out an arm, and said: “Ho! Mother’s been
haymaking!” Isak looked down over the fields and said “H’m.” Isak had
noticed already that some of the hay had been shifted; Inger ought to
be home now for her midday meal. It was well done indeed of her to get
in the hay, after he had scolded her the day before and said “Huttch!”
And it was no light hay to move; she must have worked hard, and all
the cows and goats to milk besides.⁠ ⁠… “Go in and get something to
eat,” he said to Sivert.</p>

<p>“Aren’t you coming, then?”</p>

<p>“No.”</p>

<p>A little while after, Inger came out and stood humbly on the door-slab
and said:</p>

<p>“If you’d think of yourself a little⁠—and come in and have a bite to
eat.”</p>

<p>Isak grumbled at that and said “H’m.” But it was so strange a thing
of late for Inger to be humble in any way, that his stubbornness was
shaken.</p>

<p>“If you could manage to set a couple of teeth in my rake, I could get
on again with the hay,” said she. Ay, she came to her husband, the
master of the place, to ask for something, and was grateful that he
did not turn scornfully away.</p>

<p>“You’ve worked enough,” said he, “raking and carting and all.”</p>

<p>“No, ’tis not enough.”</p>

<p>“I’ve no time, anyway, to mend rakes now. You can see there’s rain
coming soon.”</p>

<p>And Isak went off to his work.</p>

<p>It was all meant to save her, no doubt; for the couple of minutes it
would have taken to mend the rake would have been more than tenfold
repaid by letting Inger work on. Anyhow, Inger came out with her rake
as it was, and fell to haymaking with a will; Sivert came up with the
horse and haycart, and all went at it, sweating at the work, and
the hay was got in. It was a good stroke of work, and Isak fell to
thinking once more of the powers above that guide all our ways⁠—from
stealing a <i>Daler</i> to getting a crop of hay. Moreover, there lay
the boat; after half a generation of thinking it over, the boat was
finished; it was there, up on the lake.</p>

<p>“Eyah, <i>Herregud</i>!” said Isak.</p>

		</section>
	</body>
</html>
